Add zone config troubleshooting guide (#19283)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v24.3/troubleshoot-replication-zones.md

{% include {{ page.version.version }}/zone-configs/avoid-manual-zone-configs.md %}
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

## Prerequisites

This page assumes you have read and understood the following:

- [Replication controls > Replication zone levels]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#replication-zone-levels), which describes how the inheritance hierarchy of replication zones works. **This is critical to understand for troubleshooting.**
- [Monitoring and alerting > Critical nodes endpoint]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#critical-nodes-endpoint), which is used to monitor if any of your cluster's ranges are under-replicated, or if your data placement constraints are being violated.
- [`SHOW ZONE CONFIGURATIONS`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-zone-configurations.md %}), which is the SQL statement used to view details about the replication zone configuration of various schema objects.

## Types of problems

The most common types of problems you may encounter when [manually configuring replication zones]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#manage-replication-zones) are:

> 1. The _replica location_ problem, a.k.a., "The replicas are not _where_ they should be". For replica location problems, the following zone config variables may be involved:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The _replica location_ problem, a.k.a., "The replicas are not **where** they should be". For replica location problems, the following zone config variables may be involved:
```

Reviewer: Also recommend linking "zone config variables" to configure-replication-zones#replication-zone-variables

Author: done and done!

    - [`constraints`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#constraints)
    - [`lease_preferences`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#lease_preferences)
    - [`voter_constraints`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#voter_constraints)
    - [`global_reads`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#global_reads)

> 1. The _replica state_ problem_, a.k.a., "The replicas are not _how_ they should be". For replica state problems, the following zone config variables may be involved:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The _replica state_ problem, a.k.a., "The replicas are not **how** they should be". For replica state problems, the following zone config variables may be involved:
```

Reviewer: Ditto on link to configure-replication-zones#replication-zone-variables

Author: ✅ & ✅ !

    - [`range_min_bytes`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#range-min-bytes)
    - [`range_max_bytes`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#range-max-bytes)
    - [`gc.ttlseconds`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#gc-ttlseconds)
    - [`num_replicas`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#num_replicas)
    - [`num_voters`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#num_voters)

> The replica location problem is the most common reason for a troubleshooting session. It is most often caused by misconfiguration introduced by manually configuring replication zones, which is [why manual zone config management is not recommended]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#why-manual-zone-config-management-is-not-recommended). Most users should use the [Multi-region SQL statements]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}). If further customization is needed, see [Multi-region Zone Config Extensions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/zone-config-extensions.md %}).

Reviewer: To make consistent with the callout 

```suggestion
The replica location problem is the most common. It is most often caused by misconfiguration introduced by manually configuring replication zones, which is [why manual zone config management is not recommended]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#why-manual-zone-config-management-is-not-recommended). Most users should use the [multi-region SQL statements]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}). If additional control is needed, [Zone config extensions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/zone-config-extensions.md %}) can be used to augment the multi-region SQL statements.
```

Author: ✅ ty!

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}
If you just did a [cluster restore]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/restore.md %}#full-cluster) and are seeing problems with your zone configs, it may be because [zone configs are overwritten by a cluster restore](#zone-configs-are-overwritten-during-cluster-restore).
{{site.data.alerts.end}}

## Troubleshooting steps

> Follow the steps below to determine which schema objects (if any) have zone configurations that are misconfigured. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following steps to determine which schema objects (if any) have zone configurations that are misconfigured. 
```

Author: ✅

> The examples in the steps assume a local multi-region [`cockroach demo`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-demo.md %}) cluster started using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The examples assume a local multi-region [`cockroach demo`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-demo.md %}) cluster started using the following command:
```

Author: ✅

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ shell
cockroach demo --global --nodes 9 --insecure
~~~

Next, execute the following statements to set the [database regions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}#database-regions) for the [`movr` database]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/movr.md %}#the-movr-database):

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql

>  ALTER DATABASE movr SET PRIMARY REGION "us-east1";

Reviewer: Remove extra spaces before each of these lines

Author: ✅

 ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "us-west1";
 ALTER DATABASE movr ADD REGION "europe-west1";
~~~

<a name="step1"></a>

### Step 1. Start with a target schema object

> Start by looking at the zone configuration for the schema object that you think may be misconfigured. Depending on the [type of problem](#types-of-problems), one way you may have come to this conclusion is by [monitoring the critical nodes endpoint](#monitoring).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look at the zone configuration for the schema object that you think may be misconfigured. Depending on the [type of problem](#types-of-problems), you might have come to this conclusion by [monitoring the critical nodes endpoint](#monitoring).
```

Author: ✅

Use the [`SHOW ZONE CONFIGURATION`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-zone-configurations.md %}) statement to inspect the target object's zone configurations.

> For example, this is the zone configuration for the `movr.rides` table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to view the zone configuration for the `movr.rides` table:
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SHOW ZONE CONFIGURATION FOR TABLE movr.users;
~~~

~~~
----------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  DATABASE movr | ALTER DATABASE movr CONFIGURE ZONE USING
                |     range_min_bytes = 134217728,
                |     range_max_bytes = 536870912,
                |     gc.ttlseconds = 14400,
                |     num_replicas = 5,
                |     num_voters = 3,
                |     constraints = '{+region=europe-west1: 1, +region=us-east1: 1, +region=us-west1: 1}',
                |     voter_constraints = '[+region=us-east1]',
                |     lease_preferences = '[[+region=us-east1]]'
(1 row)
~~~

> In this case, the output is expected for a multi-region cluster spread across 9 nodes that was configured using [Multi-region SQL]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}). Since nothing has been manually modified, the output shows that `movr.users` is using the zone configuration from its parent `movr` database. For more information about how this works, see [How zone config inheritance works]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#how-zone-config-inheritance-works).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding output is expected for a multi-region cluster spread across 9 nodes that was configured using [multi-region SQL]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}). Since nothing about the zone configuration has been manually modified, the output shows that `movr.users` is using the zone configuration from its parent `movr` database. For more information about how this works, see [How zone config inheritance works]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#how-zone-config-inheritance-works).
```

Author: ✅

However, if the zone configuration had been manually modified, there could be inconsistencies in the output that would show a misconfiguration.

For example:

> - If the [type of problem](#types-of-problems) were a [constraint violation](#monitoring), you'd want to check that the values in [`constraints`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#constraints), [`voter_constraints`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#voter_constraints), and [`lease_preferences`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#lease_preferences) were not logically inconsistent, which would cause constraint violations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the [type of problem](#types-of-problems) were a [constraint violation](#monitoring), you'd want to check whether the values in [`constraints`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#constraints), [`voter_constraints`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#voter_constraints), and [`lease_preferences`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#lease_preferences) are logically inconsistent, which would cause constraint violations.
```

Author: ✅

> - If the [type of problem](#types-of-problems) were an [under-replicated range](#monitoring), you'd want to check the values of [`num_replicas`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#num_replicas) and [`num_voters`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#num_voters). Modifying these values can cause under-replication.

Reviewer: Is it possible to clarify that (I presume) this means one or both of those values would be set too low?

Author: For sure! Added the following, which is somewhat taken from our existing non-voting replicas docs, but modified a little 

> For example, `num_replicas` could be set too low. It's also easy to make an arithmetic mistake when configuring `num_voters`; if `num_voters` is less than `num_replicas`, the difference dictates the number of [non-voting replicas]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#non-voting-replicas). This is why most users should control non-voting replica placement with the high-level [multi-region SQL features]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/multiregion-overview.md %}) instead.

- If [range splits are failing]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/common-errors.md %}#split-failed-while-applying-backpressure-are-rows-updated-in-a-tight-loop), the value of [`gc.ttlseconds`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#gc-ttlseconds) may be too high.

> If the zone configuration for the target schema object looks good, [move to the next step](#step2).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the zone configuration for the target schema object looks good, [move to Step 2](#step2).
```

Author: ✅

> If the zone configuration does not look right, repair it now using [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md %}#configure-zone). You can set the field to another value, but often the best thing to do is to discard the changed settings using [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE DISCARD`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md %}#remove-a-replication-zone) so that it returns to inheriting values from its parent object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the zone configuration does not look right, repair it now using [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md %}#configure-zone). You can set the problem-causing field to another value, but often the best thing to do is to discard the changed settings using [`ALTER TABLE ... CONFIGURE ZONE DISCARD`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md %}#remove-a-replication-zone) so that it returns to inheriting values from its parent object:
```

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
ALTER TABLE movr.users CONFIGURE ZONE DISCARD;
~~~

<a name="step2"></a>

### Step 2. Move upward in the inheritance hierarchy as needed

> If the previous target schema object looked good, look at its parent schema object at the next level up in [the inheritance hierarchy]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md%}#how-zone-config-inheritance-works).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the target schema object looked good in [Step 1](#step1), look at its parent schema object at the next level up in [the inheritance hierarchy]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md%}#how-zone-config-inheritance-works).
```

Author: ✅

This is the new target schema object. Return to [the previous step](#step1) and follow the instructions there.

Continue this process recursively until you either find the misconfigured zone configuration or make it all the way up to [the `default` replication zone]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/configure-replication-zones.md %}#view-the-default-replication-zone) and confirm that all of your schema objects have the expected zone configurations.

## Considerations

<a name="monitoring"></a>

### Monitor for ranges that are under-replicated or violating constraints

> Monitor the output of the [critical nodes endpoint]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#critical-nodes-endpoint) to see if you have ranges that are under-replicated, or violating constraints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Monitor the output of the [critical nodes endpoint]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#critical-nodes-endpoint) to see if you have ranges that are under-replicated or violating constraints.
```

Author: ✅

> Using the range IDs from that endpoint, you can map from range IDs to schema objects as described below. This will give you [a target schema object to start from](#step1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the range IDs from that endpoint, you can map from range IDs to schema objects as described in the following example. This will give you [a target schema object to start from](#step1).
```

Author: ✅

> To monitor for under-replicated range IDs, see [Critical nodes endpoint &gt; Replication status - under-replicated ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#replication-status-under-replicated-ranges).

Reviewer: Suggest making these 2 a bulleted list

```suggestion
- To monitor for under-replicated range IDs, see [Critical nodes endpoint &gt; Replication status - under-replicated ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#replication-status-under-replicated-ranges).
```

Author: ✅

> To monitor for range IDs that are violating constraints, see [Critical nodes endpoint &gt; Replication status - constraint violation]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#replication-status-constraint-violation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To monitor for range IDs that are violating constraints, see [Critical nodes endpoint &gt; Replication status - constraint violation]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#replication-status-constraint-violation).
```

Author: ✅

Once you have a range ID, you need to map from that ID to the name of a schema object that you can pass to [`SHOW ZONE CONFIGURATIONS`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-zone-configurations.md %}).

The following example query uses the [`SHOW RANGES`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-ranges.md %}) statement to show, for each range ID, which tables and indexes use that range for their underlying storage. The query assumes the [`movr` schema]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/movr.md %}#the-movr-database) that is loaded by [`cockroach demo`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-demo.md %}), so you'll need to modify it to work with your schema.

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
    WITH movr_tables AS (SHOW RANGES FROM DATABASE movr WITH TABLES),
         movr_indexes AS (SHOW RANGES FROM DATABASE movr WITH INDEXES)
  SELECT array_agg(movr_indexes.range_id) AS ranges,
         movr_tables.table_name,
         movr_indexes.index_name
    FROM movr_tables, movr_indexes
   WHERE movr_tables.range_id = movr_indexes.range_id
GROUP BY movr_tables.table_name, movr_indexes.index_name
ORDER BY table_name, index_name
~~~

> In the following output, each range ID in the leftmost column maps to a table name and index name in the subsequent columns. For example, given this output, if the critical nodes endpoint said the constraint violation was for range ID 101, we would know to look at the zone configuration(s) for the `users` table and the `users_pkey` primary index.

Reviewer: Maybe link "critical nodes endpoint" to the relevant page to reiterate what this is

```suggestion
In the following output, each range ID in the leftmost column maps to a table name and index name in the subsequent columns. For example, given this output, if the critical nodes endpoint said the constraint violation was for range ID `101`, we would know to look at the zone configuration(s) for the `users` table and the `users_pkey` primary index.
```

Author: ✅ & ✅

  {150}                              | user_promo_codes           | vehicle_location_histories_pkey
  {101,73,72,71,100,70,81,80,90}     | users                      | users_pkey
  {90}                               | users                      | vehicles_pkey
  {150}                              | vehicle_location_histories | promo_codes_pkey
  {150}                              | vehicle_location_histories | rides_auto_index_fk_city_ref_users
  {150}                              | vehicle_location_histories | rides_auto_index_fk_vehicle_city_ref_vehicles
  {150}                              | vehicle_location_histories | rides_pkey
  {150}                              | vehicle_location_histories | user_promo_codes_pkey
  {150}                              | vehicle_location_histories | vehicle_location_histories_pkey
  {83}                               | vehicles                   | rides_pkey
  {90}                               | vehicles                   | users_pkey
  {83}                               | vehicles                   | vehicles_auto_index_fk_city_ref_users
  {90,94,93,92,85,91,84,82,83}       | vehicles                   | vehicles_pkey
(32 rows)
~~~

> ### Replication system priorities: data placement vs data durability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Replication system priorities: data placement vs. data durability
```

Author: ✅

To monitor for under-replicated range IDs, see [Critical nodes endpoint &gt; Replication status - under-replicated ranges]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#replication-status-under-replicated-ranges).

To monitor for range IDs that are violating constraints, see [Critical nodes endpoint &gt; Replication status - constraint violation]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/monitoring-and-alerting.md %}#replication-status-constraint-violation).

Once you have a range ID, you need to map from that ID to the name of a schema object that you can pass to [`SHOW ZONE CONFIGURATIONS`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-zone-configurations.md %}).

The following example query uses the [`SHOW RANGES`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-ranges.md %}) statement to show, for each range ID, which tables and indexes use that range for their underlying storage. The query assumes the [`movr` schema]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/movr.md %}#the-movr-database) that is loaded by [`cockroach demo`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroach-demo.md %}), so you'll need to modify it to work with your schema.

> XXX: GET HELP WITH THIS QUERY, OUTPUT SEEMS NOT QUITE RIGHT??? (or is it ok?)

Author: @fqazi and @annrpom , i think this SQL query to map from range IDs to schema object names could be improved, it "kinda works" (tm) but please feel free to suggest improvements

Author: (as you can see the output is maybe not the best)

Reviewer 2: this looks fine to me! maybe faizan has other thoughts...

Reviewer 3: I think you can introduce array_aggregation here to make it more readable:

```
 WITH movr_tables AS (SHOW RANGES FROM DATABASE movr WITH TABLES),
                                       movr_indexes AS (SHOW RANGES FROM DATABASE movr WITH INDEXES)
                                   SELECT array_agg(movr_indexes.range_id) as ranges,
                                          movr_tables.table_name,
                                          movr_indexes.index_name
                                     FROM movr_tables, movr_indexes
                                    WHERE movr_tables.range_id = movr_indexes.range_id
                                 GROUP BY  movr_tables.table_name,  movr_indexes.index_name ORDER BY table_name, index_name;
```

WDYT? @annrpom @rmloveland

Author: i think it's great @fqazi , agree that it's easier to read, have updated to use this query - thank you! i have also updated the surrounding text to match the new table output
